# GeoAssist---An-open-source-autonomous-research-agent-for-geoscience-data-and-literature.-
LLM driven natural language to generate summaries, bibliography lists, download PDF reports autonomously, create Knowledge Graphs (GeoKG) and extract and visualise domain data (curently uses GPlates, Macrostrat and Mindat).
For a given query such as “Discuss copper porphyry in Indonesia” the application will perform the following:
•	Crawl the Internet using the privacy based Internet search engine DuckDuckGo for PDF files that match your query.
•	Automatically machine-read the PDFs for additional geological terms, judge which to use, and autonomously conduct more Internet search queries with differing search terms, downloading hundreds of PDFs for your literature review.
•	Extracts geological entities from those PDFs (or your own files) building a Knowledge Graph (GeoKG) to detect interesting and previously unknown connections beyond single documents.
•	AI summary answer and up to 600 bibliographic references with DOI links.
•	Automatically extract and visualise geological data from structured databases: EarthByte GPlates, The University of Wisconsin’s Macrostrat and Mindat from the Hudson Institute of Mineralogy.

If you only wish to use just one option (e.g. create a knowledge-graph from documents), ensure you have documents in your assigned download folder in GEOAssist, untick all other options and run the agent.If you just wish to use the Mindat map option, untick all others then add your query and click run agent, same for the GPlates plate reconstruction option. If you just wish to gather PDF files from the Internet and collate references, untick all other options, enter your search query - choose parameters - and click run agent. The number of PDF agent rounds, is how many times it conducts further batches of search queries by mining terms in the PDF's in has already found. The max PDF per round, is how many PDF's it will download per round. The larger these numbers, th elonger it will take and the more documents you will download.

The Python code can be run locally (e.g. using an interpreter like Spyder from Anaconda (https://www.anaconda.com/). You will need to install dependent libraries via: pip install gradio huggingface_hub duckduckgo_search pillow pdfminer.six PyPDF2
You will need to login and create a free Huggingface (https://huggingface.co/) token to use the inference model os.environ.setdefault("HF_TOKEN", "API_KEY_HERE"). Alternatively, you can download a local LLM using Ollama and easily modify the GEOAssist code to use that for absolute privacy.
If using the Mindat (minerals database) option, you will need to register with Mindat (https://www.mindat.org/) and obtain your API key. Add it to MINDAT_API_TOKEN="API_KEY_HERE". No API keys needed for Gplates or Macrostrat.
Ensure you set the download directory for PDF files. It is curently set to my download folder 'C:\Users\paulh\Downloads\Geological_AI_download' so you will need to change this to a folder on your machine.
If you see PDFs called 'untitled' in your downloads folder (not with date, author and title) it may mean it is a PDF scan (no text layer). Currently GEOAssist does not OCR PDF images (it will soon!). Also note if all PDFs are like this, no Knowledge Graph (Geo-KG) will be generated as it won't be able to read any text.

Depending on the options you tick and parameters you select, the agent could run for over 1 hour or less than 1 minute. The DuckDuckGo autonomous search agent can take 10 mins or longer depending on how many adpative runs you make (so sit back and have a coffee, or do other things while it works for you). The Knowledge-graph generation takes the longest time if running on a lot of documents. The plate tectonic visualisation, lithostratigraphic summaries and maps based display from Mindat are relatively quick (<1 minute to few minutes).
